PowerBIUsage/PowerBIUsageReport.md, before:

# Power BI Usage Report
###### by [Scott Sugar](https://linkedin.com/in/scottsugar)

## Problem Statement
"You can't manage what you can't measure".  So when it comes to managing your tenant's online Power BI service, how do you measure the usage of your reports, dashboards, and datasets?  Which reports are getting the most attention?  By who?  Are there unused reports or workgroups that could be cleaned up?

The online PowerBI service does offer "Usage metrics" in the Admin portal, but it's not customizable or interactive, and seems to be more focused on "who has how many reports/dashboard" rather than the question I set out to answer "who's using the service, and what are they looking at?"

Power BI Built-In Usage Metrics:
![UsageMetrics](images/powerbi-usagemetrics.png)

## Solution Walkthrough

### Set up Pre-Requisites
We have a few things we need to set up in order to get this solution working:
* Azure AD Application - to help us authenticate to the O365 Management APIs
* Power BI Streaming Dataset - to hold the Power BI activity logs

#### Azure AD Application

1. Login to Azure AD Admin Portal and Create a new Azure AD Application
   * A) Click App Registrations
   * B) Click New Registration

![Step1](images/AAD-Step1.png)

2. Register Azure AD Application
   * A) Enter Application Name
   * B) Select Supported Acccount Types (default is fine if just gather activity logs for one tenant)
   * C) Click Register

![Step2](images/AAD-Step2.png)

3. Add API Permissions
   * A) Click API Permissions
   * B) Click "Add a permission"
   * C) Click "Office 365 Management APIs"

![Step3](images/AAD-Step3.png)

4. Request API Permissions
   * A) Click "Application Permissions"
   * B) Select ActivityFeed.Read
   * C) Select ServiceHealth.Read
   * D) Click "Add permissions"

![Step4](images/AAD-Step4.png)

5. Gather Application (client) ID, and Directory (tenant) ID
   * A) Click Overview
   * B) Copy the Application ID and Directory ID into notepad for use later

![Step5](images/AAD-Step5.png)

6. Create Client secret
   * A) Click Certificates and Secrets
   * B) Click New client secret
   * C) Enter a description
   * D) Click "Add"

![Step6](images/AAD-Step6.png)

7. Gather Client secret
   * A) Copy the Client secret into notepad for use later

![Step7](images/AAD-Step7.png)


#### Power BI Streaming DataSet

1. Create Streaming dataset
   * A) Click +Create
   * B) Click on Streaming dataset

![Step1](images/PBI-Step1.png)

2. Select data source
   * A) Select API
   * B) Click Next

![Step2](images/PBI-Step2.png)

3. Enter dataset and field names
   * A) Enter a dataset name
   * B) Fill in the "Values from stream" section as per the screenshot below.
   * Note: CreationTime is type DateTime, everything else is text.

![Step3](images/PBI-Step3.png)

4. Turn on historical data analysis and create the dataset
   * A) Scroll down
   * B) Enable "Historical data analysis"
   * C) Click Create

![Step4](images/PBI-Step4.png)

5. Gather PowerShell Code
   * A) Click on PowerShell
   * B) Copy the endpoint URL to notepad for use later
   * C) Click Done

![Step5](images/PBI-Step5.png)

### Get-PowerBIUsage Script

The PowerShell script we'll use to grab the activity logs from the O365 Management API and load the results into a Power BI Streaming Dataset can be found [here](Scripts/Get-PowerBIUsage.ps1)

#### Update Script

#### Run Script

#### Loop Script

### Create Power BI Report

## Get Started with MS Power BI Today
There are so many things MS Power BI can do to increase data visibility and improve decision making within your organization. So, let’s recap a few important points about why you need MS Power BI in your organization.

MS Power BI is data import, modeling, and visualization made easier.  It can be a self-service data visualization tool for your end-users, or we can help build reports and dashboards for you.  MS Power BI has desktop and mobile clients - even for Apple Watch - along with web-based dashboards and reports, making your data and KPIs easy to access from any device at any time.

Simply put, MS Power BI is an extremely versatile Business Intelligence platform. If you want to learn more about how to take full advantage of MS Power BI, [drop us a line today](mailto:cloud@proserveit.com?Subject=I%20Want%20To%20Learn%20More%20About%20Power%20BI%20Solutions). Our team of Data & Analytics experts will be happy to schedule a demo or a tutorial session.

Commit message:

adding code snippets to run the script

PowerBIUsage/PowerBIUsageReport.md, after:

# Power BI Usage Report
###### by [Scott Sugar](https://linkedin.com/in/scottsugar)

## Problem Statement
"You can't manage what you can't measure".  So when it comes to managing your tenant's online Power BI service, how do you measure the usage of your reports, dashboards, and datasets?  Which reports are getting the most attention?  By who?  Are there unused reports or workgroups that could be cleaned up?

The online PowerBI service does offer "Usage metrics" in the Admin portal, but it's not customizable or interactive, and seems to be more focused on "who has how many reports/dashboard" rather than the question I set out to answer "who's using the service, and what are they looking at?"

Power BI Built-In Usage Metrics:
![UsageMetrics](images/powerbi-usagemetrics.png)

## Solution Walkthrough

### Set up Pre-Requisites
We have a few things we need to set up in order to get this solution working:
* Azure AD Application - to help us authenticate to the O365 Management APIs
* Power BI Streaming Dataset - to hold the Power BI activity logs

#### Azure AD Application

1. Login to Azure AD Admin Portal and Create a new Azure AD Application
   * A) Click App Registrations
   * B) Click New Registration

![Step1](images/AAD-Step1.png)

2. Register Azure AD Application
   * A) Enter Application Name
   * B) Select Supported Acccount Types (default is fine if just gather activity logs for one tenant)
   * C) Click Register

![Step2](images/AAD-Step2.png)

3. Add API Permissions
   * A) Click API Permissions
   * B) Click "Add a permission"
   * C) Click "Office 365 Management APIs"

![Step3](images/AAD-Step3.png)

4. Request API Permissions
   * A) Click "Application Permissions"
   * B) Select ActivityFeed.Read
   * C) Select ServiceHealth.Read
   * D) Click "Add permissions"

![Step4](images/AAD-Step4.png)

5. Gather Application (client) ID, and Directory (tenant) ID
   * A) Click Overview
   * B) Copy the Application ID and Directory ID into notepad for use later

![Step5](images/AAD-Step5.png)

6. Create Client secret
   * A) Click Certificates and Secrets
   * B) Click New client secret
   * C) Enter a description
   * D) Click "Add"

![Step6](images/AAD-Step6.png)

7. Gather Client secret
   * A) Copy the Client secret into notepad for use later

![Step7](images/AAD-Step7.png)


#### Power BI Streaming DataSet

1. Create Streaming dataset
   * A) Click +Create
   * B) Click on Streaming dataset

![Step1](images/PBI-Step1.png)

2. Select data source
   * A) Select API
   * B) Click Next

![Step2](images/PBI-Step2.png)

3. Enter dataset and field names
   * A) Enter a dataset name
   * B) Fill in the "Values from stream" section as per the screenshot below.
   * Note: CreationTime is type DateTime, everything else is text.

![Step3](images/PBI-Step3.png)

4. Turn on historical data analysis and create the dataset
   * A) Scroll down
   * B) Enable "Historical data analysis"
   * C) Click Create

![Step4](images/PBI-Step4.png)

5. Gather PowerShell Code
   * A) Click on PowerShell
   * B) Copy the endpoint URL to notepad for use later
   * C) Click Done

![Step5](images/PBI-Step5.png)

### Get-PowerBIUsage Script

The PowerShell script we'll use to grab the activity logs from the O365 Management API and load the results into a Power BI Streaming Dataset can be found [here](Scripts/Get-PowerBIUsage.ps1)

#### Update Script

Before trying to run the script, please update the variables at the top of the script with the values we copied into notepad

![UpdateScript](images/UpdateCode.png)

#### Run Script

To start, you'll need to "create a subscription" so the Management API will start to save your tenant's activities for later retrieval.

```` 
.\Get-PowerBIUsage.ps1 -startSubscription
````

#### Loop Script

The code below will continue to look for available activity logs every 15 minutes and push them into to the streaming dataset.

````
while($true){
  $x = .\Get-PowerBIUsage.ps1
  Start-Sleep -Seconds 900
}
````

### Create Power BI Report

## Get Started with MS Power BI Today
There are so many things MS Power BI can do to increase data visibility and improve decision making within your organization. So, let’s recap a few important points about why you need MS Power BI in your organization.

MS Power BI is data import, modeling, and visualization made easier.  It can be a self-service data visualization tool for your end-users, or we can help build reports and dashboards for you.  MS Power BI has desktop and mobile clients - even for Apple Watch - along with web-based dashboards and reports, making your data and KPIs easy to access from any device at any time.

Simply put, MS Power BI is an extremely versatile Business Intelligence platform. If you want to learn more about how to take full advantage of MS Power BI, [drop us a line today](mailto:cloud@proserveit.com?Subject=I%20Want%20To%20Learn%20More%20About%20Power%20BI%20Solutions). Our team of Data & Analytics experts will be happy to schedule a demo or a tutorial session.
